# Controls and Compliance Assessment 

## Scenario

This is based on a fictional company:

Botium Toys is a small U.S. business that develops and sells toys. The business has a single physical location, which serves as their main office, a storefront, and warehouse for their products. However, Botium Toy’s online presence has grown, attracting customers in the U.S. and abroad. As a result, their information technology (IT) department is under increasing pressure to support their online market worldwide. 

The manager of the IT department has decided that an internal IT audit needs to be conducted. She expresses concerns about not having a solidified plan of action to ensure business continuity and compliance, as the business grows. She believes an internal audit can help better secure the company’s infrastructure and help them identify and mitigate potential risks, threats, or vulnerabilities to critical assets. The manager is also interested in ensuring that they comply with regulations related to internally processing and accepting online payments and conducting business in the European Union (E.U.).   

The IT manager starts by implementing the National Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework (NIST CSF), establishing an audit scope and goals, listing assets currently managed by the IT department, and completing a risk assessment. The goal of the audit is to provide an overview of the risks and/or fines that the company might experience due to the current state of their security posture.

Your task is to review the IT manager’s scope, goals, and risk assessment report. Then, perform an internal audit by completing a controls and compliance checklist. 

## Botium Toys: Scope, goals, assets and risk assessment report

### Scope 

This audit focuses on Botium Toys' complete security program, covering assets such as employee devices and equipment, their internal network, and systems, while reviewing existing controls and compliance practices.

### Goals
Assess existing assets and complete the controls and compliance checklist to determine which controls and compliance best practices need to be implemented to  improve Botium Toys’ security posture.

### Current assets
Assets managed by the IT Department include: 
* On-premises equipment for in-office business needs
* Employee equipment: end-user devices (desktops/laptops, smartphones), remote workstations, headsets, cables, keyboards, mice, docking stations, surveillance cameras, etc.
* Storefront products available for retail sale on site and online; stored in the company’s adjoining warehouse
* Management of systems, software, and services: accounting, telecommunication, database, security, ecommerce, and inventory management
* Internet access
* Internal network
* Data retention and storage
* Legacy system maintenance: end-of-life systems that require human monitoring 

### Risk assessment

#### Risk description
Currently, there is inadequate management of assets. Additionally, Botium Toys does not have all of the proper controls in place and may not be fully compliant with U.S. and international regulations and standards. 

#### Control best practices
The first of the five functions of the NIST CSF is Identify. Botium Toys will need to dedicate resources to identify assets so they can appropriately manage them. Additionally, they will need to classify existing assets and determine the impact of the loss of existing assets, including systems, on business continuity.

#### Risk score
On a scale of 1 to 10, the risk score is 8, which is fairly high. This is due to a lack of controls and adherence to compliance best practices.

#### Additional comments
The potential impact from the loss of an asset is rated as medium, because the IT department does not know which assets would be at risk. The risk to assets or fines from governing bodies is high because Botium Toys does not have all of the necessary controls in place and is not fully adhering to best practices related to compliance regulations that keep critical data private/secure. Review the following bullet points for specific details:

* All Botium Toys employees currently have access to internally stored data, including potential access to cardholder data and customers’ PII/SPII.
* Encryption is not used to protect the confidentiality of customers’ credit card information stored in the company’s internal database.
* Access controls for least privilege and separation of duties have not been implemented.
* The IT department has ensured data availability and implemented controls to maintain data integrity.
* A firewall is in place, blocking traffic based on a defined set of security rules.
* Antivirus software is installed and regularly monitored by the IT department.
* An intrusion detection system (IDS) has not been installed.
* There are no disaster recovery plans or backups of critical data.
* The IT department has a plan to notify E.U. customers within 72 hours of a security breach and enforces privacy policies and procedures.
* The existing password policy is weak and does not meet current complexity requirements (e.g., at least eight characters with letters, numbers, and special characters).
* There is no centralized password management system, leading to productivity issues when employees/vendors request password resets.
* Legacy systems are monitored but lack a regular maintenance schedule or clear intervention methods.
* The physical location (offices, storefront, and warehouse) has adequate locks, updated CCTV surveillance, and functioning fire detection and prevention systems.


#### Additional Info 

In Cybersecurity, control types can be classified in three ways: 
1. Administrative/Managerial controls
2. Technical controls
3. Physical/Operational controls

Control types (providing defense and protecting assets) include, but are not limited to:
1. Preventative (preventing an incident from occurring in the first place)
2. Corrective (restoring an asset after an incident)
3. Detective (Determining whether an incident has occurred or is in progress)
4. Deterrent (Discouraging attacks)

## Controls and compliance checklist
### Controls Assessment Checklist
Select “yes” or “no” to answer the question: Does Botium Toys currently have this
control in place? 

| Yes / No / ? | Control | Explanation |
| :-------        |    :---:   | :---     |
| No | Least Privilige | The employees have access to customer data. This has to be changed to reduce the risk of breach. |
| No | Disaster Recovery Plan | At the moment, there is no plan for handling disaster. Implementing this ensures the business continuity. |
| Yes | Firewall | The organization has a firewall to block traffic based on an appropriately defined set of security rules. |
| ? | Password policies | Password policy exists, yet the requirements are considered weak and put the identity management access at risk. |
| Yes | Antivirus | The antivirus software is active and regulary monitored by IT team. |
| No | Backups | This is as same as disaster recovery plan. They are not prepared in the case of breach. They have to implement the backup plan, such as incremental, full, or partial. |
| No | Encryption | This would protect confidentiality of data. |
| No | IDS | This would help IT team to identiy possible intrusions by the threat actors. | 
| Yes | Storefront| Although IT team is not responsible for the management at the storefront, however the organization should have sufficient locks.|
| Yes | CCTV | It is working and functioning. |
| Yes | Fire detection | The organization has these. However, the team should maintain it and establish a plan on how to use it. |

### Compliance Checklist
Select “yes” or “no” to answer the question: Does Botium Toys currently adhere to this
compliance best practice? 

##### Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)

| Yes/ No / ? | Best Practice | Explanation |
| :---        |    :---:   | :---     |
| No | Authorized users can access to customer's credit card. | At the moment, all employees have access to it which is a bad practice in the business.  |
| No | Credit card is stored in a secure environment. | It is not encrypted and violates the law and regulations. |
| No | Encryption is secured. | No, the encryption has not taken place yet. | 
| No | Adopt secure password management policies. | Password policies are nominal and no password management. | 

##### General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
  
| Yes/ No / ? | Best Practice | Explanation |
| :---        |    :---:   | :---     |
| No | EU customers are kept secured. | The organization does not apply GDPR practice. Thus, it puts them at risk of being fined by the EU government. |
| Yes | Privacy policies are maintained properly.| According to the scenario, it has been enforced by the IT Team members and other staff. |

##### System and Organizations Controls (SOC type 1, SOC type 2) 

| Yes/ No / ? | Best Practice | Explanation |
| :---        |    :---:   | :---     |
| No | User access policies are established | Employees have access to internally stored data which means the access policy has not been applied. |
| Yes | Data integrity is consistent, complete, accurate | Data integrity is in place. | 
| No | Data is available to authorized users | Currently, all the employees can access all the data. |

## Recommendations (optional)

To strengthen Botium Toys' security and better protect sensitive information, several key controls need to be implemented. These include 
* Least Privilege
* separation of duties
* encryption
* disaster recovery plans
* strong password policies
* an intrusion detection system (IDS)
* ongoing legacy system management, and
* a password management system.

Additionally, Botium Toys must address compliance gaps by properly classifying assets and identifying further controls to enhance their security posture and safeguard sensitive data effectively.
